It’s not just the psychiatrists and talk-show hosts. Political scientists are also watching Anthony Weiner’s downward spiral and shaking their heads, searching for analogs in the annals of N.Y.C. politics. But throughout the months I tracked this year’s race for City Hall, one historical parallel did keep cropping up: It’s ’77, all over again.I heard it starting way back in January, and it was repeated often as I followed the candidates on the trail. To many in the political class, the Democratic race for mayor has evoked memories of 1977, the year the voters rejected the incumbent, Abe Beame, and elevated a little-known liberal, Ed Koch, out of a crowd that featured representatives, it seemed, of every ethnicity and borough across the city.The race in 1977 “was the whole cast of characters,” says George Arzt, an old-school strategist who served as Koch’s pressman for years. “You had six major stars of the political world” — in addition to Beame and Koch: Mario Cuomo, the upstart with low name recognition but big backing from Gov. Hugh Carey; Bella Abzug, the former congresswoman; Herman Badillo, the Bronx powerhouse; Percy Sutton, the courtly Harlem boss — “all pitted against each other.”But the parallel is based, at least in part, on willful amnesia. New York City in 1977 had yet to recover from its fiscal free fall, that summer began the Son of Sam shootings and there were the blackout and the subsequent looting. But given the “wide open” race — as Koch himself termed it in his final interview, not long before he died — and the diversity of its entrants, the echo will no doubt continue to resound.With Christine Quinn again ascendant, following Weiner’s latest troubles, a different historical trivia question may prove more apt: When’s the last time a local politician jumped from the City Council to be elected mayor? You would have to go back a century, when John Purroy Mitchel, the 34-year-old head of the Board of Aldermen, the council of the day, won in 1913, becoming the “Boy Mayor.”
