We asked Tony Gervino, author of this week’s Lives essay, to share with us the most helpful piece of writing advice he ever received.In the mid-’80s I had an English teacher at Byram Hills High School in Armonk, N.Y., named Bernard Pollak, who went by the nickname Bud. He was the first person to take an interest in my writing. At the time, I was producing a lot of unintentionally hilarious fiction, thanks, in part, to my music listening habits: a nascent form of music called black metal along with bands like Joy Division. The Violent Femmes’ “Hallowed Ground” practically lived in my cassette Walkman for about four months. Give that record a listen and you’ll better understand my state of mind at the time.In one story, a woman beats cancer only to get hit by a truck upon leaving the hospital. In another, a man who works in a dental-floss factory hangs himself. It is a “body of work” that I have kept tucked away in my sister’s basement, a place I had hoped would have flooded by now.I very badly wanted to begin writing long-form fiction and figured that that is what “adult” writers did: exposed painful, uncomfortable thoughts and memories, however manufactured those may be. Yet one day after class, Mr. Pollak pulled me aside and said, “You know, you don’t have to kill everyone every time.”He said it gently and with good humor, and it sounded like it was a long time coming. Had I continued down that path, I realize now, my future was pretty much set: an angry loner, probably living in a North Williamsburg walk-up amid a dozen unfinished manuscripts and a pet bird, while secretly creating marketing copy for pharmaceutical companies to make rent. Instead, I took Mr. Pollak’s message to heart and began focusing my efforts on stories that had a happy ending, too. More important, I also began to think of my life in similar terms.Although we haven’t been in contact in nearly 30 years, I recently wrote to Mr. Pollak to thank him for, as I put it, “being the only high-school teacher that I can vividly remember” and for his advice. I added, “Ironically, someone dies at the end of my most recent piece.” I was referring to this week’s Lives, and I very badly wish that weren’t the case. Several days later, he wrote back. “I of course don’t remember giving you that advice, but I still stand by it!” He concluded the note by writing: “On the other hand, if you want to kill off all those characters, feel free!”I fear that it’s too late to change course now. Besides, I hate walk-ups.
