Judith Warner, a contributing writer, wrote this week’s cover story about women who left the work force to stay at home and are now trying to restart their professional lives. She is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress and the author of “Perfect Madness: Motherhood in the Age of Anxiety.”
You’ve written two books on the American family, one about medication and another on the changing cult of motherhood. How did you get interested in this particular aspect of family life — mothers’ attempts to return to the work force?It really grew out of a longer-term interest: how women my age were making the transition from the early phase of motherhood — and adulthood generally — to middle age. That developed into a curiosity to know how the women I interviewed for “Perfect Madness” were doing. I went to an academic conference on motherhood and gave a paper on, essentially, “Perfect Madness 10 Years Later” — how the culture of motherhood had changed in America since the early 2000s. I noticed, over the past couple of years, how a number of aspects of what I think of as the “Perfect Madness” moment had changed because of the economy. People just didn’t have the money to put into hyperparenting in the same way. You couldn’t idealize stay-at-home motherhood at a time when more and more women needed to work because their husbands were earning less. And — as I say in the article — there was this shift in social-science research in as people started problematizing “intensive motherhood” (to borrow a phrase from Sharon Hays) rather than problematizing working motherhood. I found all this fascinating. I became really curious to know what had happened to the women who, in the late 1990s and early 2000s, had most closely embodied the dominant motherhood ideal — well-off stay-at-home moms. At that academic conference, I heard Pamela Stone give a talk about new research she was doing into how her interview subjects from her book, “Opting Out?” were faring 10 years later. And the idea came together at that point.How did you select the women that you interviewed for this article? Was it mostly through following up with women who you wrote about before? Following up with the women I interviewed before proved to be incredibly difficult — I tried to reach out to all the local “Perfect Madness” mothers who were stay-at-home moms at the time, and virtually none responded to my queries. But I did get to Carrie Chimerine Irvin, who appears in my article, that way.I also went back to the women who were interviewed by “60 Minutes” in 2004 on the same subject and re-interviewed them all. And then there was a group of stay-at-home moms mentioned in the “60 Minutes” segment that still exists. I contacted them and reached about a dozen that way. Kuae Kelch Mattox, who I also write about in this week’s article, is someone I met at the motherhood conference where I also met Pamela Stone. She gave a great talk where she stressed the importance of changing the narrative around African-American stay-at-home mothers. When I got the assignment to do the article, I knew I’d go back to her.What surprised you, if anything, when you got back in touch with these women or got in touch with them for the first time?What surprised me was how incredibly easy it was for some women to get back into the work force. In fact, in the first interviews, I had a disproportionate number of those women, and I was shocked. They more or less picked up the phone once they were ready to go back — and they had job offers. As I did more interviews, however, I came to see that those extremely fortunate women represented the elite of the elite — and that other women with less prestigious educational and career backgrounds and less high-powered social contacts had a much, much harder time of it.
Did the stories of the many women you talked to more or less track in similar ways? Or were they very different in the details? I was particularly intrigued by one husband’s jealousy that his wife had been able to spend 12 years away from the job. Was that a common sentiment?The stories tracked in accordance with the status of the women — again — those with the most money, the best educational pedigrees, the best social connections — tended to do really, really well. Everyone else had a much harder time, particularly if they were in professions, like journalism, that had taken a big hit in their years out. And women who divorced ended up in the most precarious position of all. I spoke with three husbands, and only one expressed his jealousy. I’ve heard it — or heard of it from wives — more often, however — and Sylvia Ann Hewlett’s research showed that, postrecession, a third or quarter of wives said their husbands were jealous. I have seen and heard this many times anecdotally. I was so glad that Ted, Kuae’s husband, put it into words in such an honest way.
You write about privileged, middle-class women because they are the ones who had the opportunity to leave the work force in the first place. Had any of these women since dropped out of the middle class because of the financial crisis or divorce? Do you have a sense that women with fewer resources make similar calculations to these opt-out/opt-in women, or are they too busy hustling to provide for their families?I would just say first that these are upper-middle-class, not middle-class, women. I think it’s really important to make that distinction; there has been a big tendency in the past to blur the distinctions and make it sound like this was — or is — a phenomenon of “women” of a certain generation. It’s not — most women (like most men) have no choice in how they set up their work and parenting lives. I think that point can’t be made often enough. People perhaps don’t want the lives of the rich and angst-filled shoved in their faces; they don’t want the reminder of how tough and different their own lives are shoved in their faces — but we all need to face the unfairness of the fact that having a choice, in this country, is a privilege of the wealthy. And yet, at the same time, finding yourself in an essentially unlivable situation work- and home-wise is a universal. It just plays out differently among wealthy versus poor or working-class (or middle-class) women.Many of the women I spoke with were so well off that they were sheltered from the fallout of the Great Recession — this, actually, was something that surprised me a great deal. But I know from reading Hewlett that this is not typical. Again, there are big differences of wealth even within the upper-middle class. All this brings us back to the fact that the very top earners in our country have pulled away from everyone else — and live lives that are now quite divorced from the pressures weighing on other families, including upper-middle class families that are better off than most but still struggling.
Before leaving the office, Sheilah O’Donnel tried to work part time but felt marginalized. In some countries, like Germany, there is still prejudice against working mothers; part-time work arrangements, along with long maternity leave, are common. You have written about spending the first few years of motherhood working in Paris. Those commenting online to your article also suggest that this is a structural problem in the United States. Do you see any way forward?There absolutely is a structural problem in the U.S., and that structural problem is, for me, the most important take-away from this article. Successful women — successful people — are now facing 50-plus-hour work weeks, plus endless hours on evenings and weekends spent tethered to e-mail. This makes for a really poor quality of life for a family with two working parents. It is not at all surprising to me that families that can afford to have one member of the couple drop out or scale way down choose to do so. And it’s not surprising that that member usually turns out to be the woman, because the choice is more socially acceptable for them and because they usually earn less money than their husbands. We certainly need the sorts of work-family supports that all other industrialized nations have: paid maternity leave of a decent length, paid sick days, the ability to work part time without losing your job, etc. But we will also have to be smart about how we implement these policies — if we ever get them. They have had some really perverse effects in terms of women’s work force advancement in places like France and even Sweden. When the structural supports are too generous, it seems, employers sometimes avoid hiring women of childbearing age, and when a really large number of mothers take extremely extended leave and then work part-time, it holds back the workplace progress of all women. That said: I don’t believe those perverse effects are an argument against the policies. They just have to be well thought out in terms of optimizing both time and home and progress at work. And they have to be addressed to and used by both men and women, so that women don’t end up on a separate track. That brings us back to changing the culture of work again.You refer back to an article published in the magazine in 2003 called “The Opt-Out Revolution.” Do you think that because of the financial crisis and changing attitudes, the “revolution” is over?I think a “revolution” tends to signify something really large and societal, whereas this phenomenon really did affect just a small segment of the population. (Directly, that is — the conversation around it affected many more people and, I believe, helped stoke the sense among women who needed to work that they were somehow lesser mothers.) I do think our views toward work and motherhood change with our times, dovetailing particularly with the ups and downs of the economy.
