“You’re not at a nightclub, you’re at church,” the minister said, welcoming a thousand or so churchgoers to Irving Plaza’s storied ballroom one Sunday night in April. I don’t know if the place was technically sold out — can a church sell out? — but the line to get in ran the length of Irving Place and then snaked halfway down 16th Street, and the place was packed. The crowd was young, beautiful and, it seemed, unattached. I saw almost no one over 40, and none had brought children.I’d come to Hillsong NYC at the invitation of Scott Harrison, the founder of charity: water, the nonprofit I profiled in this past Sunday’s magazine — partly because I was trying to understand Harrison’s journey from nightclub promoter to charismatic founder of Silicon Valley’s favorite cause, and also because, I mean, megachurch in Manhattan! Who knew such a thing existed here?Quite a few people, actually. Hillsong NYC is apparently one of the fastest-growing churches in New York, with more than 5,000 congregants attending its Sunday services each week. The nightclub megachurch is Pentecostal by persuasion (meaning speaking in tongues, baptism by dunking in the pool of the Hotel Gansevoort in the Meatpacking District) and affiliated with a much larger church by the same name based in Sydney. It was founded in 2010 by Carl Lentz, a thirty-something hip-hop-quoting, tattooed minister with a burgeoning celebrity following. (“At lunch talking bout our savior Jesus Christ,” Justin Bieber wrote on Instagram in June, posting a picture of himself with Lentz, who was at the baptism of the Oklahoma City Thunder star Kevin Durant.)The evening began with a catchy set of rock-gospel songs, which have been on the Australian pop charts. The music, performed by a large ensemble, was followed by the collection plate (credit cards accepted!) and then a brief sermon.Pastor Lentz had a prior commitment, but his replacement, Frank Damazio, directed us to the First Epistle of John, and said, “You can take out your Bibles.” A few people actually had bound copies, but mostly I saw iPhone screens light up. In any case, the reading was a single verse, so a Bible — even one in app form — wasn’t really necessary.  Damazio began a short, chatty sermon about the importance of loving oneself, and God, unconditionally that I think could have charitably been described as accessible, maybe less charitably as lightweight — and which at the time seemed pretty nice to me. It ended with “Can I get an amen?”The band reprised the best number of the night, we were told to raise our hands and let the Holy Spirit come into us. Before we left, another hip-looking Hillsong leader made a pitch recommending we stay for the 9 p.m. service — or as he put it the “9 p.m. Holy Spirit, after-party megaparty.”I’m a Jew, raised by a family full of nonbelievers, but I have to admit, I was tempted.
