Oklahoma City meteorology is its own world. My article in last Sunday’s issue about the May tornadoes focused on Gary England, the pioneering weatherman who is preparing to retire as chief meteorologist at Channel 9 after 42 years on the air. But I spent time with plenty of other memorable characters: the local rock star whose psychedelic residential compound got flooded in the storm, the scientific geniuses at the National Weather Service, the policeman who rushed into the storm to help rescue 20 people — including a teacher’s aide who had been impaled by a metal table leg — from the rubble of a second-grade classroom.One of my favorite characters was Emily Sutton, a meteorologist and storm chaser at England’s rival network, Channel 4 (I write about her experience, captured in the video below, of getting caught up in the peripheral winds of the widest tornado in recorded history on May 31). Sutton is 28. She came to Oklahoma City three years ago from suburban Chicago and has gradually become a kind of celebrity in the community. She has performed the national anthem, twice, at Thunder games. (In high school, Sutton was in a show choir that, she says, helped inspire the TV series “Glee.”) As we talked one night at a local restaurant, people kept interrupting us to thank Sutton for her work.Sutton fell in love with weather as a child, when her father would take her outside to watch summer thunderstorms. In grade school, she saw the movie “Twister” and got swept away by the romance of storm chasing. She started actually chasing tornadoes in college. She was often the only woman out there.Sutton is Channel 4’s first female meteorologist — a position that hasn’t always been easy. Historically, the weather community has been a boys’ club. Sutton told me that from the beginning of her career, viewers have been obsessed with her hair and makeup and outfits. “I didn’t want to show a lot of skin, because I was trying to stay away from the ‘weather bunny’ thing,” she said. “But it got to the point where I was getting so much criticism. They called me frumpy.” Finally she switched from power suits to clothes more like what she wore in regular life. “That worked out better,” she said. “I realized I have to learn to embrace being younger.”I asked Sutton if she could see herself, decades from now, becoming an OKC weather icon like Gary England. She found it hard to imagine.“I don’t know how long I’m going to be in this career,” she said. “They boot women off the air. I haven’t seen many older female meteorologists. Actually, I don’t know any older female meteorologists who are on-air.“I’d like to have a family one day. How can you have kids and work three 18-hour days straight? I don’t know; if it’s in the cards, maybe it will happen. It would be cool to be the first female chief. But it’s scary. That’s when I would really feel like people’s lives were in my hands. I still have a lot of learning to do.”On the morning of June 1, after all the tornadoes and the flash flooding, Sutton was awake until 4 a.m. — 24 hours after her workday started. I asked her, later that evening, if she’d ever experienced weather that intense.“Not like that,” she said. “Never. The only one that can compare to it is Moore, and that just happened. I don’t even think I’ve had time to process that, and then this happened. I don’t think about emotional repercussions, but there totally are. There’s stress after the fact when you go through something like that. By the way, I feel like you are being my therapist right now — this helps, to talk about things.”
