In Sunday’s magazine, I write about the lives of famous elephants in the Indian state of Kerala – animals who have their own fan clubs, appear in movies and get trucked around the state for half the year to appear as the main attraction at temple festivals. One of the foremost chroniclers of Kerala’s elephant craze is a filmmaker named Sreekumar Arookutty, who was the creator, director, writer and host of a popular local TV show called “E4 Elephant.” Earlier this year, Arookutty wrote the lyrics to a pop song, “The Lord of Beauty,” in tribute to a star elephant named Thiruvambadi Shivasundar. “He is a jewel, the pearlstone of Kerala,” the song goes. “As beautiful as a poem carved in stone.” Arookutty also directed the music video below, starring Shivasundar himself, which provides about as vivid a taste of Kerala’s elephant-fan culture as could be hoped for.The first I ever heard of Thiruvambadi Shivasundar was from an elephant-welfare activist named V.K. Venkitachalam, who told me that he’s “the most brandy-addicted elephant in Kerala.” A few hours later, I found Shivasundar getting a bath in the front yard of a mansion owned by the businessman Sundar Menon. Like many wealthy Keralites, Menon made his fortune in the Gulf; he’s chairman of Sun Group International, a fuel supplier in Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. (In the music video, which Menon commissioned, he’s the guy with a goatee who’s often seen leading Shivasundar by the tusk.) Shivasundar was born in the wild and captured as a calf, and in 2002 Menon bought him for 3 million rupees, or around $60,000 — a steal compared with today’s prices. Menon told me that earlier this year, a “not very good elephant” sold for 13 million rupees. “It’s not that good an investment — it’s a risk,” he said. “Some elephants are very dangerous.” But not Shivasundar. Unlike some of the star elephants I write about in my article, he has never killed a human being.Menon laughed uncomfortably when I asked him if it’s true that he feeds brandy to Shivasundar. “Sometimes,” he said. How much? “It’s a secret,” he said. “If you give it to him in a bucket he’s very happy. Not every day. Often.”
