Susan Dominus, a staff writer for the magazine, is the author of this week’s cover story about Stephen King and his literary family. Her last article for the magazine was a profile of Ikram Goldman, the owner of a Chicago fashion boutique.Were you a fan of Stephen King’s books or those of any of the many writers in the family before writing this article?I would say, like most people, I’d encountered and enjoyed a bunch of Stephen King over the course of my life (I remember being enthralled by “Misery” while enduring a grueling, seven-hour bus ride in India that would have been harrowing had I not been so totally absorbed in my book). But part of the pleasure of this assignment was having the opportunity to read so much of his work at once; people sometimes complain that King repeats himself, but I was actually pretty blown away by his range. Forget about the plots — the characters are so numerous, so specific, so varied. Layered on top of that was the pleasure I took in reading his family members’ books around the same time, because I could see the ways they spoke to each other, no matter what genre they had chosen.Why use such an unusual format for this article — a series of miniprofiles — rather than a more traditional, longer treatment? Adam Sternbergh, my editor on the story, had that idea. He thought it would probably be the most satisfying way to get to know them, and I loved it right away. Given that most of the people in the article were not known to readers, simply keeping track of who was who in another format, given the length of the piece, might have been a problem.Because Stephen and Tabitha King made their children read them books, it almost seems they were training them to be writers. The family’s conversations still revolve around books. Do they do anything together that is not related to the family business? My sense is that Stephen and Tabitha were not explicitly trying to raise writers; it is more that they both love the written word, and love writing so much, they wanted to make sure their children had the chance to cultivate that same passion. As for what the family does when they’re not reading, watching movies or talking about what they’ve read and seen: Stephen King is a famous Red Sox fan and goes to the games whenever he can. He shares that obsession with Owen. Tabitha spends a lot of time with her grandchildren, gardens and is a fanatical mushroom collector. When the family gets together, they play a lot of card games, like hearts. In fact, if you lose at hearts, the other family member gets to pick a book that you, the loser, then has to read on tape — so it does all come back to books. I know Stephen King has lost to Owen, and Owen made him record Graham Greene for that reason — there were others, too, and Stephen was a bit bitter because he suspects Owen never even listened to them. I don’t get the feeling they’re playing a lot of touch football, Kennedy-style.Naomi is the only nonnovelist among Stephen King’s children. Does she regard her work as a minister as somehow related?Naomi definitely sees her work as true to the family tradition of storytelling. She mentioned to me that her father was raised on Bible stories, which, I told her, surprised me since his memoir, “On Writing,” gives you the sense that his background in storytelling came from a steady diet of books filled with chills, thrills and spills. Naomi’s response to that was: “What do you think the Bible is?”
Tabitha described the burdens and advantages of their children as similar to those of any other family. Do the other family members agree? I can’t help thinking that Joe has had it harder, because his father is a famous and successful writer.By virtue of the fact that their family is so affluent, they have it easy, as fiction writers go, and they would be the first to admit that. But to me, it’s quite amazing to think about Joe, sitting at home and writing novels, not knowing if they would ever be published, while his father was simultaneously publishing his usual best-selling books in quick succession. Joe told me he was getting just enough positive feedback for stories here and there to keep him going — and my sense was that he loved it so much, that offset whatever rejection he was facing. Then when he sold his first novel, “Heart-Shaped Box,” the reviews were so good, he was virtually anointed as a new young talent, rather than dismissed as some kind of wannabe. Owen ran up against some reviews that seemed to want to smack him down for doing something different from his father: Oh, Stephen King’s son wants to be literary?
You compare the Kings, a family of writers, to the Brontë sisters. But you also note that Owen’s writing teachers at Columbia University went out of their way to slam his father’s writing. Do you think that the Kings aren’t usually considered some kind of “first family of letters” out of snobbishness? I think it’s more that Owen and Kelly are really just coming into their own right about now — “Save Yourself” is Kelly’s third book, but I think it’s her best, and Owen’s “Double Feature” just came out this spring. So I’m not sure how many people even realized, until recently, how many writers there were in one family. I doubt they’ll ever really function as anything close to a first family of letters — Owen and Kelly, for the most part, seem to want to establish themselves independent of Stephen King, lest it seem that they were habitually trying to gain leverage from his name. Owen’s Web site mentions tons of his favorite books, and I thought it was a little odd that none of his father’s were there, until he explained that he just did not want to seem to be getting some kind of mileage from the connection. I guess the jig is up now that my story has been published, but in general, he never volunteers information about who his father is. Maybe he’ll get more comfortable with that as he becomes even better-known himself.
