Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon.com, is worth $28 billion, Forbes estimates. In other words, he’s good for the $250 million he’s spending personally to buy The Washington Post, even if the purchase, announced this week, is being described as making little financial sense. Maybe he was on to something 14 years ago, when, as Peter de Jonge wrote in an entertaining and still relevant cover story for the magazine, Bezos and his company were fostering a “forced and incongruous indifference to money” among Amazon’s work force. They had lots of morale-boosting mottos but a volatile stock price. (When de Jonge expressed skepticism about the company, one Amazon executive told him, “I can tell you’re not a believer.”) De Jonge imagined that being employed there must have been “a little like living in Pompeii 2,000 years ago.”But apparently all those years of not-profit-making paid off.We went back to de Jonge’s article looking for any insights into the character who will be taking over one of the country’s best-known newspapers. This passage seemed germane. (The “investment” Bezos is referring to was Amazon’s acquisition of Drugstore.com.)Bezos declined to say if he has investments in other e-commerce companies, but says, “We may do more investments like this.” It’s this kind of almost routine doubling down every few months of his already massive bet and nervy expansion of the scale of his ambitions that keeps the public and Wall Street on the edge of their seats, makes Bezos a moving target to his rivals and buys him more time to turn a profit. And as he encourages us to imbue his company with the same limitless potential that as a rule we only vouchsafe for ourselves, we have to keep revising upward and outward our best guess of just what Bezos is really after. Does he want to be the reincarnation of Sam Walton? Does he want to be Michael Eisner? . . .Bezos, who once told his younger brother that he “refuses to evaluate either-or equations,” most likely wants to be all of these and then some. Indeed, his every gesture, posture and feature, from his standard-issue wardrobe of khakis and brown rubber-soled shoes to his homemade desk fashioned out of a door, seems calculated to belie the incendiary fact that Bezos is one of the world’s most ascendant capitalists, with apparently boundless ambitions.Today de Jonge says he recalls being “very impressed by the guy.” After writing the article, he wanted to buy stock in Amazon. “Of course,” he says, he “never got around to it.”
