The first rule of going viral is that you should never plan to go viral. And with that rule in no way in mind — that’s the point! you can’t think about it! — Joel Lovell let a casual e-mail correspondence with George Saunders morph into a blog post that reached a level of Internet popularly normally reserved for Lindsay Lohan and counterintuitive arguments about yoga. His reproduction of Saunders’s graduation speech at Syracuse University was by orders of magnitude the most popular thing ever to run on The 6th Floor blog — which has, since its inception, been a strong believer in the first rule of going viral. As the magazine’s editor, Hugo Lindgren, wrote in his inaugural post in March 2011, “This blog is meant as a humble complement to the magazine — a place to let readers listen in on the conversations that happen in the office.” We never planned to be the fastest, nor the buzziest, nor to have the most cat GIFs (a staple of the second rule of going viral). We just planned to do the sort of stuff that magazine editors do — “allow our curiosity to wander and see where it leads,” as Lindgren put it — but do it a little more publicly.Sometimes that curiosity leads us to a consideration of Web traffic data. The overwhelming response to Lovell’s post made us wonder what constitutes a popular 6th Floor blog post, so we cranked up the stats machine to see which posts since the blog’s inception have pulled in the most readers. (You’ll notice two “Who Made That?” posts on the list. We had noticed their popularity too, which is partly why we spun the franchise, started by Hilary Greenbaum, a designer at the magazine, into the column that runs each week in the magazine.) Here you have it: the top 10 posts (after the George Saunders one) from The 6th Floor:1. A Better Way to Measure Twitter Influence, by David Leonhardt2. Listen to the New Bon Iver Record, by Wm. Ferguson3. As if You Don’t Have Enough to Read, by Hugo Lindgren4. The Hollywood Issue: Behind the Scenes, by Dean Robinson5. Who Made That Moka Express? by Hilary Greenbaum6. 17 Things I Learned From Reading Every Last Word of The Economist’s “The World in 2013” Issue, by Mark Leibovich7. Who Made Those NASA Logos? by Hilary Greenbaum8. Not a Pretty Picture (Rowing = Pain), by Dean Robinson9. So You Think You Can Undress? by Stacey Baker10. Words You Don’t Say, by Rachel NolanInterestingly, Dan Kois’s Top 10 Top 10 Lists of 2011 was popular enough to encourage us to make this top 10 list but not quite enough to make its way on; it came in at No. 11.
