Robin Thicke’s “Blurred Lines” just notched its ninth week at No. 1 on Billboard’s Hot 100, suggesting not only that it’s the official summer song of 2013 — an argument that was actually settled weeks ago — but also that its dominance might extend well into the fall. What is it that’s giving this bouncy but seemingly lightweight track such staying power?Well there’s the irresistible, insistent groove, the bass line that keeps winding and pulsing and staying several steps ahead of boredom. And then there’s the friendly rat-a-tat of the cowbell — I was tempted to make this post about the greatest pop songs to use one, starting with Hugh Masekela’s own classic summer song, “Grazin’ in the Grass,” from 1968. That Thicke’s video features barely clad models probably hasn’t hurt, either. (For Thicke’s reaction to the controversy they stirred, see James C. McKinley’s report on the song in The Times.)But what I keep coming back to is the song’s choice DNA. It’s got Michael Jackson-like yelps throughout. And that bass line came right from Marvin Gaye’s No. 1 hit from the summer of ’77, “Got to Give It Up,” like “Blurred Lines,” a seeming throwaway (it was tacked onto a live album) that turned into a highlight of the singer’s storied career. “Got to Give It Up” came out during a very good year for the music business — a year bookended by Fleetwood Mac’s “Rumours” and the soundtrack to “Saturday Night Fever,” two of the biggest-selling albums of all time (and coincidentally the year Robin Thicke was born). Yet even by then the great pop-rock-soul-disco alliance was starting to splinter, and within a couple of years, you would be hard pressed to find someone who would admit to liking, say, both the Sex Pistols and Sister Sledge.But Gaye was having none of that. In “Got to Give It Up,” he hit all of his marks. The song was funky. It was soulful. It rocked. And though Gaye’s rapturous falsetto sometimes obscured the lyrics, there was a real song there, too, about a wallflower who finds redemption through dancing. He was never more hopeful than when he sang, “No more standin’ along the side walls.” The song achieved a chart trifecta, reaching No. 1 pop, soul and disco.Thicke seemed to understand the song’s universality, consciously or subconsciously. “Blurred Lines,” even in its title, is a song that’s meant to decodify, destratify, deformat. And that’s the spirit that makes the track more than just a tribute, and keeps it grabbing new audiences or holding on to the ones who have loved it all these weeks. Only time will tell if it will be one of the all-time great summer songs (for a list of vintage summer songs, see Stephan Talty’s 1995 article in the magazine, “The No. 1 Summer Song of Love“). But as Gaye sings, “Long as you’re groovin’, there’s always a chance.”
