We were driving down Knoxville Avenue in Peoria, Ill., on our way to the cleaners to pick up the dress — the wedding was 10 days off. I flipped on the radio, and was greeted with the Grateful Dead’s “Scarlet Begonias,” an unusual but much-welcomed selection from a station known more for playing Lynyrd Skynyrd and Bad Company. “Nice,” I said. “A good omen.” We were young and in love and getting married, and the sky was yellow and the sun was blue!Then came another Dead tune — I don’t remember which. Oh, no, I said, pulling the car over into a parking lot. It was Aug. 9, 1995. We waited out the second tune in silence, looking at each other, and waited for the inevitable announcement. Jerry Garcia was dead at age 53.“Well,” I said, “I guess that rules out them showing up and playing the wedding.”There was nothing to be shocked about. We were in Chicago a month earlier for what was, now, officially, the Grateful Dead’s last show. You didn’t know it then, but you might have wondered. Garcia was unstable and hoarse. The whole tour had been a disaster, and the final show at Soldier Field creaked and crawled and just finally petered out, with Garcia barely contributing in a truncated second set. We noted the unusual double encore, a token gesture of apology from the band. The final song, now so appropriate, was “Box of Rain,” about soothing somebody in his dying days, about trying to give him all you can give him to make the journey just a little more comfortable.Eighteen years ago. Hard to believe.The Dead, of course, have persevered in various permutations over those years. The vibe is still out there. Just last summer I took my daughter, who was 13, to see Bob Weir and Phil Lesh, performing as Furthur, at Coney Island, and it was just fantastic, a show conjured right out of 1973, one of the band’s finer eras. Garcia’s absence still hangs in the air, of course.Thank goodness for the vast concert archive. Some nights I will still sit out under the stars on the back porch and let a slow, mournful “China Doll” drift off into the night or let the curling “Scarlet” solos elevate my spirits. His power chord in “I Know You Rider” — “I wish I was a headlight” . . . BRRRRRRUUUUM . . . “on a northbound train” — still raises the hair on the back of my neck and often alarms the neighbors.I know it’s not for everyone. The Grateful Dead is like licorice, Garcia once said. Not everybody likes licorice. But the people who like licorice really like licorice.On the anniversary of Jerry Garcia’s death, here are two interviews he gave to Relix magazine, the jam-band bible, conducted more than a decade apart. The first is from 1976, at one of the band’s high points; the second is from 1987, just as the band was on the upswing from what was a pretty forgettable era.And naturally there should be music. How to dog-ear just one? You just do. And my choice is “Ripple,” circa 1980, because, well, let there be song to fill the air.
